## Background
This project calls somatic single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in cancer 
- SNVs are single nucleotide base changes that occur after being borned, not inherited (genetic mutation that can cause cancer). There exists SNVs calling algorithms that try to read all this variants that exists in the cancer tumour but not in our normal blood. It is not as simply just comparing a cancer tumour with our normal cells. Reads of our genome are noisy, and is difficult to asses if a variant is part of a somatic cell -cancer- or not.

We have 4 different SNV calling algorithms that sometimes yield different results. The four algorithms are: MuTect [link](https://www.broadinstitute.org/cancer/cga/mutect), VarScan [link](http://dkoboldt.github.io/varscan/), FreeBayes [link](https://github.com/ekg/freebayes), and VarDict [link](https://github.com/AstraZeneca-NGS/VarDictJava). The task of the project is to construct a robust meta-learning approach that integrates the calls from the different methods in a way that achieves highest accuracy on an independent test dataset.
- This means that this four algorithms give sometimes different lists of possible cancer variants that are different than in our normal blood, and the job is to use the four lists to produce a final list in order to be more certain if a variant is part of the cancer or not. 

### Dataset
The dataset can be found in [here](https://tecmx-my.sharepoint.com/:u:/g/personal/a01177727_tec_mx/EUXNrdoUX3xJn91B7ru9EWcBOVTvBk1LZSRX6H8lzzua1g?e=kwy8Rk) (~12GB). The directory contains a folder for each tumor sample. Each tumor folder contains the following files:
1. X_freebayes.vcf : Positions called as SNVs by freebayes algorithm.
2. X_mutect.vcf : Positions called as SNVs by mutect algorithm.
3. X_vardict.vcf : Positions called as SNVs by vardict algorithm.
4. X_varscan.vcf : Positions called as SNVs by varscan algorithm.
5. X_truth.bed : The true SNVs for the tumor sample. The file format uses three columns: chromosome, genomic start, genomic stop. The truth set is defined either using spike-ins in the synthetic tumors (syn*) or based on expert knowledge in the real tumor samples (real*).

So, each folder consists of tumour sample that has different files that have the list of the variants predicted by each algorithm. And the 'truth' is the correct list of variants, is the way to check wheteher the predictions are true or not. Each .vcf file has a .vcf.gz.tbi file respectively, which is only use for programs to interact through the .tbi file and obtain the information from the .vcf file. 

The data set also contains synthetic data. Read [here](https://www.synapse.org/Synapse:syn312572/wiki/62018) on how the synthetic tumor data was generated.
- For a more in depth explanation: DNA regions consist of nucleotide bases (letters A, C, G, T) which are instructions that our cells use to create proteins and many vital functions. Mutations occur when these nucleotide bases were, wrongly, changed; this can cause bad effects on our cells like causing cancer. To identify cancer better, we want to read these nucleotide bases and identify if a cancer has some bases different than in our non-cancer cells, to compare which variants are in the cancer and not in our cells and be able to attack the specific cancer.
- So, when trying to read these nucleotide bases is called sequencing, and this process is prone to errors, is difficult, and sometimes it gives noise or wrong data. So people usually targe a small region of the DNA and perform many reads (many reads of the sequence) to reduce the chance of errors and be more sure of the data. And with this, produce better mutation-calling algorithms to identify mutations that exists in the cancer and that in other parts of our body dont. 
- Following these thought process, synthetic datasets exists so people can test and refine the mutation-calling algorithms. This synthetic dataset took a deeply sequenced dataset (60x-80x coverage - readings) from a single sample and was randombly split into two (each 30x-40x coverage). Using some algorithms, artificial mutations, variants, and cancer genes were added to one sample. So because of this, we know which mutations were modified, so this will helps us on progress on understanding this studies.  

The directory contains two real tumor dataset (real1 and real2), where the ground truth is known (through expert knowledge and manual curation). There is data on all mutations in the real1 sample. However, real2 is split into two parts: in part1 (real2_part1) you have both VCF data and truth labels (bed file); in part2 (real2_part2), you only have VCF data. The final challenge is to predict the truth labels in real2_part2 as accurately as possible. Accuracy will be quantified using the F1-score (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/F-score).
